Hello, everybody, welcome to
functional JavaScript first steps.
I'm Anjana Vakil, I'm coming to you
from San Francisco, California.
And I'm really excited to spend the day
with you going over the basic concepts of
functional programming.
And really the core ideas that we
need to get started in our journey,
which may be lifelong as
functional programmers.
So just a couple words about myself,
I am a software developer and
developer advocate.
I do not have a formal computer science
background, I studied philosophy and
was an English teacher
before I got into coding.
And so, when I started working in
software development, I found that
different programming paradigms, different
styles or mindsets for coding were
really interesting to me, perhaps
because of that philosophy background.
And functional programming in particular,
just was really cool when
I first learned about it.
So what I would like to do with you
all today is take you along on some of
the things that I learned in my journey
as a newbie functional programmer,
just starting out.
And really just focus on wrapping our
heads around functional programming
in its most basic form, so
that we can then go on and
continue our learning journey with other
great courses on front end masters
with other great books and resources
that are out there and be in really good
shape to continue diving into functional
programming after this course.
So what we're gonna talk about today is
basically what is functional programming,
what does it mean to do
functional programming?
What does functional code look like
compared to non functional code?
And what are the tools that we
need to write functional programs,
in particular as JavaScript developers?
So since we have a lot of web developers,
a lot of JavaScript folks here,
we're gonna be doing everything in
JavaScript, which is actually although not
usually considered a functional
language is a really great language for
learning functional programming,
in my opinion.
And I'm gonna say a little bit more later
why I think that it's such a great fit for
functional code.
And so we're going to talk about some of
these concepts like pure functions, we're
gonna talk about side effects and why we
want to avoid them, we're gonna talk about
treating programs as pipelines through
which data flows between functions.
And we're gonna be talking about some of
these words that we might have heard but
don't really understand yet
like higher order functions, or
first class functions, things like
closure and currying and whatnot.
Our focus is not gonna be on
the terminology so much, but again,
on those core ideas,
we're gonna talk about immutability and
changing data in a way that's functional,
that works with functional programming.
And we're gonna get some hands on practice
with some coding exercises, that will
allow us to hopefully grapple with those
concepts and ask any questions and talk
to each other about how we can wrap our
heads around some of these tricky ideas.
What we're not gonna be doing today
[LAUGH] Is covering everything there is in
the world to know about functional
programming, not possible.
And you could definitely spend your life
studying this stuff plenty of people
have and will continue to.
But we're gonna just again,
get those basics under our belts so
that we can go on and continue learning
everything you could ever possibly know
about functional programming, although,
again, it'll take you a lifetime.
Again, we're not gonna really focus on
the jargon, we'll look at a few terms that
are helpful to know, and helpful to
understand what to google for, but we're
gonna focus more on those ideas instead of
the academic mathematical side of things.
But at the end of the day, you'll be
in really good shape to go on and
dive in deeper to that mathematical
notation and things like that.
And again, we're gonna be focused on
JavaScript, so we're not gonna talk about
other languages that are usually
considered more pure functional languages.
We're just gonna be using the tools that
we have as JavaScript developers to again,
really focus on the concepts that we need
to understand a lifestyle of functional
programming.
So, today, what we're gonna be doing
is a lot of coding in our browser.
This course, and all of the exercises
that we're gonna be doing are written in
a platform called observable which
you're looking at right now.
What we're seeing right here,
is a observable notebook.
Now, I full disclosure I work at
observable as a developer advocate.
But I think it's an amazing tool for
doing this functional
programming workshop together,
because what observable is,
is a platform for working with code and
data and visualizations,
interactively live in the browser.
So it runs totally in your browser and
requires no setup or installation,
it uses JavaScript and
web technologies, so
we should be right at home as web
developers and JavaScript folks.
And what's really great about
observable is it's reactive,
as you enter new code, you get the rest
of your programs updated instantly.
Actually, this is powered by
functional concepts under the hood.
We're not gonna dig into that,
but if you're curious,
you can read more about
how observable works.
You don't need an observable
account to do the coursework today,
you can edit all of the code
right in your browser.
However, if you do wanna save your
progress, if you want to save the copy
your own copies of the notebooks that
we're going to be looking at today,
you can sign up for
a free account, totally free.
You can log in with your GitHub or
your Twitter or Google accounts,
there's a big signup button at the top
right of the pages that we'll see here.
And you can create a copy of each of
our exercise notebooks called a fork,
that is your own place to play with and
change and refer back to however you want.
So all of the materials for the course
are available on observablehq.com,
you can go to this URL, observable
hq.com slash collection slash at ongina,
slash functional minus
JavaScript minus first steps.
If that's too much to type out,
you can also go to observablehq.com
slash at ongina, and you should see
in my collections the functional
JavaScript first steps collection.
And that will bring you to a page
with all the different slides and
exercises that we're
gonna work through today.
I'm gonna be taking us through one by one,
so hopefully it will be clear
where we are in the course.
But if at any point, anybody has a
question about what notebook we're looking
at or which exercise we're working in,
please don't hesitate to ask.
And remember, you can always come
back to this collection page,
functional JavaScript, first steps to
find all of the materials linked here.
Everything is also linked
out from our introduction,
which is this document that
we're looking at right now,
which also has a great outline of all of
the things that we're gonna cover today.
Wow, so, much stuff, but hopefully this
is going to be functional programming.
So, hopefully time will fly and
we will get through all of this
stuff in just a single day.
So just really quickly to go over the plan
for the day, we're gonna start out
by taking a kind of step back and thinking
about what functional programming even is.
And it turns out that it is actually one
basic idea that everything else follows
from which we will then through the rest
of the day kind of explore in more depth.
So once we establish that main idea,
we're gonna take a look at
some additional tools and
techniques that make working in
functional programming a lot easier,
things like recursion,
things like higher order functions.
We're gonna talk about closure what
that means and why it's useful.
We're gonna talk about building
programs out of function, so,
composing or merging functions together
to create more complex programs.
And we're gonna talk
about immutable data and
why it is sort of goes hand in
hand with functional programming.
And then the end of the day again,
we should be left with probably a very
exhausted brain but
lots of great concepts and questions,
hopefully that we can take
to continue our journey.
So I've got some great resources and
links for you in some next steps.
In our notebooks, there is at the top,
you're gonna see this functional
JavaScript first steps with a list of all
the notebooks and you can click, Next and
Previous to go back and forth between
notebooks and the collection.
They're all in the order that we're
gonna walk through them in the course.